Over the years, there were
many sisters with outstanding faith.
Sister Matsue Ishii was one of them.
She was born in Japan in 1909.
Although she grew up in a Buddhist family,
she had a thirst for Bible knowledge.
In 1918, the Spanish flu hit her area
and she saw lots of coffins with dead bodies.
She and her elder sister
both also caught the Spanish flu,
and a week later, her sister died.
She wondered, ‘Why do people die,
and what happens to them at death?’
In 1928, when Matsue was 19,
her father arranged for her
to marry Jizo Ishii, a zealous Buddhist.
Matsue was introduced to the truth in Osaka
through the book The Harp of God.
That was given to her by a brother
who lived in a neighboring house
that belonged to the International Bible
Students Association.
Matsue was baptized in March 1929,
and her husband, Jizo,
was baptized a short time later.
In June 1939, when she was 30 years old,
she and her husband were arrested
and were separated from each other.
This certainly called for faith.
She said that she nearly died
when she was in solitary confinement
for almost a year.
Matsue was released
toward the end of 1944,
and she was reunited with Jizo
after World War II ended.
Both she and her husband
had remained faithful.
Let us now consider
another encouraging example.
Right after World War II ended,
far away from Japan,
in Estonia, northeastern Europe,
Ella Toom was introduced to the truth
in April 1945
and was baptized in August 1946,
at age 20.
She was arrested by the Communists
on December 27, 1950,
and sentenced to imprisonment.
She was sent
to a slave labor camp in Russia,
the infamous Vorkuta camp
above the Arctic Circle,
and later to other prison camps
250 miles, or 400 kilometers,
southeast of Moscow.
The sisters continued
to be spiritually-minded.
They made miniature copies
of The Watchtower
and put them inside bars of soap
and resealed the soap.
This certainly called for faith.
She did not have to serve for 13 years
but actually was released on May 4, 1956,
after five and a half years.
The year after,
she married Brother Lembit Toom.
However, the threat
of searches and arrests continued
until the preaching work
was legalized in Estonia in 1991.
In the following video,
note some other details
regarding the lives
of these two faithful women
—Matsue Ishii and Ella Toom.
For nearly a year,
I had been held in solitary confinement
in a tiny, filthy, bug-infested prison cell.
Five and a half years after my arrest,
I was released.
If we truly rely on Jehovah,
really love him
and cry out in our heart for his help,
just as he did not forsake me,
he will not forsake his servants.
They arrested me
and took me in for questioning.
An interrogator invited me to sign a document
stating that I would discontinue preaching.
I said, “I would rather live in prison
“with my relationship with God intact
than be free and lose his approval.”
My determination
has been to heed the Bible’s admonition:
“Trust in Jehovah and do good.”
I have learned that doing this
leads to receiving
“the requests of your heart.”
How did Sisters Ishii and Toom show faith?
Please turn with me to Psalm 37.
Sister Ishii had faith
that Jehovah would not abandon her,
in line with Psalm 37:25,
which reads:
“I was once young and now I am old,
“but I have not seen
any one righteous abandoned,
nor his children looking for bread.”
Her faith helped her
to endure difficult tests of integrity.
She was arrested on June 21, 1939,
and taken to a police station
and put into a dark cell
with soot hanging from the ceiling.
Thereafter, she was transferred
to another location
and put into solitary confinement.
Her husband was also arrested,
and she did not see him
until the war had ended.
‘I nearly died in that cell,’ she said.
But she was exposed to another test too.
When interrogated,
she found out from the officials
that Junzo Akashi,
the overseer of the Japan branch,
had abandoned the truth.
Sister Ishii replied:
“Akashi is only an imperfect human . . .
He is no longer my brother.”
Sister Ishii remained loyal.
Similarly, Sister Toom from Estonia
refused to compromise
or to abandon her faith.
She prayed and meditated on Bible principles
in order to endure,
like Psalm 119
and verses 97, 98 say:
“How I do love your law!
“I ponder over it all day long.
“Your commandment
makes me wiser than my enemies,
because it is with me forever.”
In 1949,
Ella Toom was arrested by the Communists.
They took her in for questioning.
She reports:
“Forced to remove all my clothing
“and [being watched]
by young police officers,
“I felt humiliated.
“Yet, after I prayed to Jehovah,
“peace and calmness of heart came over me.
“Next, I was put in a tiny cell,
“where I could not even lie down.
“I was taken out only for interrogations.
“The officers would say:
“‘We aren’t asking you
to deny the existence of God.
“‘Just stop your stupid preaching!
“You can have a promising future.’
“And they would threaten:
‘Do you want to live?
Or do you want to die with your God
on the fields of Siberia?’”
She said: “For three days,
I was prevented from falling asleep
“between the repeated interrogations.
“Meditation on Bible principles
helped me to endure.
“Finally, an interrogator
invited me to sign a document
“stating that I would discontinue preaching.
“‘I have given this matter much thought,’
I said,
“‘and I would rather live in prison
with my relationship with God intact
“than [to] be free and lose his approval.’
“At that the interrogator shouted:
“‘You fool!
All of you will be arrested
and sent to Siberia!’”
But she was unexpectedly set free
at midnight.
However, she was arrested again
sometime later.
In the following dramatization,
note how a brother shows faith
like that of Sisters Ishii and Toom.
As the world went from bad to worse,
I dug deeper into God’s Word.
I wanted to stay strong,
like so many
brothers and sisters in the past.
“Those who remained faithful
had no special abilities
“and were inconspicuous.
“Surely all of us
must always trust in Jehovah
with all our heart.”
I memorized scriptures.
I knew these words would build my faith
and give me the strength I needed
to face what was to come.
A new wave of arrests occurred this week
as local authorities enforce new restrictions
on Jehovah’s Witnesses.
This is coming just 14 days
after the Supreme Court’s ruling . . .
“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good;
“reside in the earth,
and act with faithfulness.
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,
and he will grant you
the desires of your heart.”
We had to be more discreet,
but we never stopped talking
about God’s Word.
We had to face many difficulties,
but with God’s Word embedded in our hearts,
we faithfully endured to the end.
How can you imitate the examples
discussed in this symposium?
How can you imitate Sarah?
Build faith by meditating
on Jehovah’s goodness to his people
and to you personally.
How can you imitate Rahab?
Take a firm stand for true worship,
even if you have
only a limited knowledge of the truth.
How can you imitate Hannah?
Build faith by taking note
of Jehovah’s answers to your prayers.
How can you imitate
the captive Israelite girl?
Young ones,
show faith by sharing the good news
with schoolmates, teachers,
and unbelieving family members.
You can also imitate
the mother of Jesus, Mary.
How?
Strengthen your faith, and trust in Jehovah.
Carefully examine the Scriptures
and meditate on them.
How can you imitate the Phoenician woman?
Recognize whom
Jehovah is using to do his will
and associate yourself with them.
How can you imitate Mary,
the sister of Lazarus?
Build faith by considering
all that God’s Word says
about his wonderful promises.
The Bible says:
“Mary . . . sat down at the feet of the Lord
and kept listening to what he was saying.”
How can you imitate Sisters Ishii and Toom?
Let the power of God’s Word
motivate you to endure faithfully.
When we clearly perceive
the “great cloud of witnesses
surrounding us,”
we can “run with endurance
the race that is set before us,”
as Hebrews 12:1 encourages us to do.
Like these faithful women,
we can all be included
in Jehovah’s “book of remembrance,”
as mentioned at Malachi 3:16,
and inherit everlasting blessings.